   
 
   
 
ISRU Pilot Excavator: Bucket drum scaling experimental results 
Jason Schuler1, Andrew Nick2, Kurt Leucht3, Austin Langton4, Drew Smith5  
 
1 Exploration Systems and Development Office, Mail Code: UB-E2, NASA Kennedy 
Space Center, FL 32899, 321-867-7854, jason.m.schuler@nasa.gov 
2 Exploration Systems and Development Office, Mail Code: UB -E2, NASA Kennedy 
Space Center, FL 32899, 321-867-4873, andrew.j.nick@nasa.gov 
3 Exploration Systems and Operations Division, Mail Code: NE-XS, NASA Kennedy 
Space Center, FL 32899, 321-861-7594, kurt.leucht@nasa.gov 
4 Exploration Systems and Development Office, Mail Code: UB -E2, NASA Kennedy 
Space Center, FL 32899, 321-867-9822, austin.g.langton@nasa.gov 
5 Exploration Systems and Development Office, Mail Code: UB-E2, NASA Kennedy 
Space Center, FL 32899, 321-867-8726, jonathan.d.smith@nasa.gov 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
NASA’s Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD) is funding the development 
of a robotic excavator called the “ISRU Pilot Excavator” (IPEx) which will be a 
technology demonstration of excavating and transporting 10 metric tons of lunar 
regolith on the surface of the moon with a 30kg-class robotic excavator. IPEx will be 
the next generation of robotic excavators to use bucket drums as excavation tools. 
This is an evolution of the Regolith Advanced Surface Systems Operations Robot 
(RASSOR) developed at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC).  
Bucket drums are hollow cylinders with regularly spaced scoops around the 
perimeter. The drums rotate in one direction to collect regolith with the scoops. The 
regolith slides down an internal baffling system inside the drum which prevents the 
regolith from falling back out of the scoops (see Figure 1). The captured regolith can 
then be transported while held in the drum 
and then deposited by rotating the drum in 
the opposite direction allowing the 
regolith to slide back down the baffling 
and out of the excavation scoops. Bucket 
drums were developed by Lockheed 
Martin in 2008 and used on multiple 
robotic excavator prototypes ever since. 
However, the forces on a bucket drum and 
considerations for scaling have not been 
measured in detail. Bucket drums are 
challenging to model using classical 
blade\bucket equations because of their 
unique geometry. Therefore, this experiment was performed to measure the forces on 
three bucket drums of the same geometry at different scales. Small: 9.4” (239mm) 
Figure 1. Bucket Drum with partial 
section view showing internals 

 
   
 
dia. x 8.1” (206mm) width, Medium: 11.6” (294mm) dia. x 10” (254mm) width, and 
Large: 17” (432mm) dia. x 14.1” (358mm) width.  
The test stand consisted of an actuated gantry with controlled motion in the vertical 
(Z) and horizontal (X) axes and a single rotation axis (R). The bucket drums were 
individually mounted to the rotary axis of the test stand and translated across a 
prepared bed of BP-1 lunar regolith simulant at a specified linear speed and cutting 
depth. The test stand was outfitted with a torque sensor in line with the rotation of the 
drum (R) and a 3 axis (X, Y, and Z) load cell. In addition to the three sizes of bucket 
drums the linear excavation speed and cutting depth were test variables.  
The results of these experiments show the relationship between the three scales of 
bucket drums for factors such as: excavation force, torque due to regolith rotation 
inside the drum, excavation energy, time to fill, etc. and will be discussed in detail in 
this paper. This fundamental data will be used in the design of IPEx and can inform 
the design of future bucket drum excavators. 
INTRODUCTION  
The In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) Pilot Excavator (IPEx) Project will develop 
a 30 kg-class excavator to demonstrate robotic excavation of large amounts (10,000 
kg) of lunar regolith. IPEx uses novel excavation tools, called bucket drums, which 
are hollow cylinders with scoops staggered around the outside. Regolith is collected 
with the scoops and flows into the drum where it is captured due to an internal baffle 
system. The excavator can then transport the regolith in the drum and reverse the 
direction of the drum rotation to dispense the regolith back out. IPEx uses sets of 
bucket drums that dig simultaneously in opposing directions (see Figure 2). This 
combination of bucket drum excavation tools and counter-acting excavation forces 
enables low mass robotic excavators to effectively dig in reduced gravity 
environments. This is a significant departure from terrestrial excavators that rely on 
high mass and weights to produce tractive forces to counteract the forces of 
excavation. To date, NASA has only excavated tens of kilograms of lunar regolith. 
Excavation has never been performed by a dedicated excavation technology 
machine/robot, rather only as a secondary function of an exploration rover or by an 
astronaut using scooping/sampling methods. IPEx will be NASA’s first lunar surface 
robot specifically designed with the reliability and efficiency to excavate large 
quantities of regolith. This capability is critical to sustained lunar mission success. By 
the end of the decade, the excavation needs increase from sampling levels to tens or 
hundreds of tons of regolith per year. Full-scale sustained ISRU and construction of 
infrastructure will increase that amount to thousands of tons of regolith per year. IPEx 
is targeting a 2026 demonstration on the lunar surface. 
 
   
 
 
The IPEx leverages years of design refinement and testing of RASSOR. The first 
generation of RASSOR was a proof-of-concept that demonstrated the ability to do 
excavation in low gravity with a low mass excavator by using counter-acting 
excavation tools. The second generation of RASSOR (known as RASSOR 2.0) was a 
breadboard system built with components that have proven paths to flight, which 
enabled the team to accurately estimate key metrics such as mass and energy usage 
for future flight versions of the excavator to inform architecture studies.  
The IPEx dry mass target is 30kg which requires a reduction in scale from the current 
RASSOR 2.0 system which has a dry mass of 65kg. Volumetrically, IPEx will be 
scaled between 50% - 70% of RASSOR 2.0. The bucket drums of IPEx will therefore 
also be reduced scale, and a method of estimating the forces on the scaled bucket 
drums during excavation is needed.  
An abundance of prior work and models exist for prediction of excavation forces  
however these models represent conventional excavation tools such as blades and 
buckets and do not address the unique configuration of a bucket drum.  
The primary goal of this work is to inform the design of the IPEx by answering the 
following questions: 
• What is the regolith capacity of the scaled bucket drum? 
• What are the forces (X,Y ,Z) and torque due to excavation? 
• How do those forces and torque change with drum rotational speed, linear 
cutting speed, and cut depth? 
• How long does it take for the scaled bucket drum to fill at various cut 
depths and speeds? 
• How much energy is used during excavation, and how does it vary with 
drum rotational speed, linear cutting speed, and cut depth?  
Figure 2. Counter-acting excavation forces 
Figure XX:  
 
   
 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP  
Three different bucket sizes have 
been selected for the test (see 
Figure 3). The range of sizes is to 
help determine a scaling 
relationship for different size 
bucket drums. The largest drum is 
the RASSOR 2.0 drum. The 
medium and small drums were 
scaled to meet the minimum and 
maximum required sizes for the 
ISRU Pilot Excavator. The 
overall dimensions for the bucket drums are as follows (see Figure 4 and Table 1): 
 
Table 1. Bucket Drum Dimensions 
 Width Diameter Scoop Width Scoop Height 
Small 7.83” 
(198.9mm) 
9.35” 
(237.5mm) 
2.03” (51.6mm) 1.04” (26.4mm) 
Medium 9.69” 
(246.1mm) 
11.62” 
(295.1mm) 
2.5” (63.5mm) 1.36” (34.5mm) 
Large 13.88” 
(352.6mm) 
17.21” 
(437.1mm) 
3.56” (90.4mm) 1.88” (47.8mm) 
Bucket drums have many performance-dependent dimensions that effect their digging 
and collection. The scoop height and width determine the dig depth and flow rate into 
the drum. Special consideration needs to be made to mitigate bridging of the regolith 
as it enters the drum. Scoop height also determines the effective internal diameter, 
which determines the amount of total regolith collected. The baffle follows behind 
the scoop opening and is required to keep regolith from falling out of the scoop 
Figure 4. Bucket Drum Dimensions 
Figure 3. Bucket Drum Size Comparison 

 
   
 
opening during digging and transportation. The baffle geometry can also affect 
bridging, and total regolith collected. The baffle channel width expands as it 
approaches the center to reduce bridging and ease the flow of regolith as it enters the 
drum. Each drum slice, which consists of two scoop openings, has closed section 
walls to separate the drums slices from one another. The intent of the closed slices is 
to reduce the amount of regolith that may fall out of a downward facing drum scoop 
by limiting the exposed volume to one slice instead of the entire bucket drum. 
The bucket drums are made using two different construction techniques and 
materials. The large drum was made for RASSOR 2.0 and is a bonded assembly 
consisting of aluminum, carbon fiber, and stainless steel. The vertical side and section 
walls are aluminum. The top scoop and baffle sections are thin carbon fiber sheets 
which are glued to the vertical side and section walls. The cutting-edge teeth are 
made from stainless steel and are riveted to the carbon fiber sheets and vertical side 
and section walls. The small and medium bucket drums are a monolithic piece made 
from 3D printed SLS nylon. The general geometry of all bucket drums is intended to 
be identical except for the obvious scaling differences. The major differences 
between the large and small/medium buckets drums are the sharp corners of the 
baffle sections and the scoop teeth. The larger bucket drum has perpendicular corners 
in the baffle sections and the small/medium bucket drums have a radius. The radius is 
assumed to help reduce friction and aid in reducing bridging. The small/medium 
bucket drums were printed with a straight edge along the scoop cutting edge whereas 
the larger bucket drums have a jagged tooth profile. 
Testing was performed in the KSC Regolith Test Bed (RTB). The RTB is an 
enclosure with 120 tons of BP-1 lunar simulant corresponding to a volume of 8m x 
8m x 1.1m. BP-1, or Black Point 1, lunar simulant is an inexpensive geotechnical 
lunar regolith simulant sometimes used for excavation and mobility testing. BP-1 is 
derived from material in the Black Point basalt lava flow in northern Arizona. 
Because it is derived from basalt, BP-1 is more representative of mare lunar soils than 
highland lunar soils. The granular size distribution of BP-1 falls within the one 
standard deviation of actual lunar regolith particle distribution returned by Apollo 
lunar missions. 
The bucket drum test stand consists of 2 linear axes, X and Z, and a rotary axis, R 
(see Figure 5). The linear axes are closed loop controlled and have linear absolute 
sensors measuring the position of the final stage. The X axis has a maximum speed of 
246 mm/sec and a positioning accuracy of 0.25 mm. The Z axis has a maximum 
speed of 460 mm/sec and a positioning accuracy of 0.25 mm. 
 
   
 
To prepare the BP-1 simulant, leveling and compacting attachments were designed to 
attach to the bucket drum test stand. A beam was used to drag across the excavation 
area using the X axis to create a surface parallel with respect to the test stand (see 
Figure 8). Relief trenches were dug at the start and end of the excavation area to 
allow deposition of the surcharge of the regolith collected by the beam. The 
compacting attachment uses a handheld vibratory concrete compactor with a 
modified compacting plate (see Figure 9). The compacting plate is wider than the 
large bucket drum and has bent up edges to allow it to stay above the regolith during 
operation. The compacting attachment is driven using the X axis. The relief trenches 
also allow for the bucket drum to start and end excavation without engagement. The 
end relief trench was also used as the dump location for the bucket drum after 
excavation. 
The test is outfitted with two 
feedback sensors: a torque 
sensor and a multi-axis force 
sensor (see Figure 6). The 
torques sensor is coaxial with 
the R axis. The torque sensor 
is an Interface Force sensor 
part number: 5330-600. This 
sensor has measuring range of 
±600 in·lbf (68 N·m) and a 
nonlinearity of ±0.1% of full-
scale output. The multi axis 
sensor is an Interface Force 
3 Axis Force Sensor 
Torque Sensor 
Figure 6: Sensor Layout 
X 
 Z 
R 
~3.85m excavation 
area 
Figure 5. Bucket Drum Test Stand 
 
   
 
sensor part number: 3A120-1kN. This sensor has measuring range of ±225 lbf (±1 
kN) and a nonlinearity of ±0.2% of full-scale output. NIST calibrations were used for 
both sensors. A calibrated weight was used to verify the sensors in their system 
configuration.  
The Data Acquisition System (DAQ) is a National Instruments (NI) cRIO. The 
software allows for manual and scripted control of the test stand actuation. The 
scripted control allows for blocking and non-blocking position and velocity 
commands and time waits for each axis. This ensures repeatable test motion profiles 
for each experiment. The force and torque sensors are logged at 1 kHz, but the 
feedback from the motor controllers is logged at 10 Hz. This motor feedback is 
oversampled to properly align with the force/torque data. The slower rate of motor 
feedback is due to the limitations of the CAN bus interface used to control the motor 
controllers. The force/torque sensors are measured using a NI-9237 C Series 
Strain/Bridge Input Module, which has a 24-bit resolution and a ±25 mV/V input 
range. The software performs all the unit conversions real-time. The variables that are 
recorded are as follows: X (lbf), Y(lbf), Z (lbf), Torque (in*lbf), Z position (mm), Z 
Velocity (mm/sec), X Position (mm), X Velocity (mm/sec), R Position (revolutions), 
R Velocity (rpm), R (Motor Active Current, Amps), Sample Rate (Hz), Elapsed Time 
(minutes). 
EXPERIMENTAL VARIABLES 
Tests were performed varying the size of the bucket drum, linear speed during 
excavation, and cut depth. Table 2 lists the experimental variables and their ranges.  
Table 2. Experimental variables and ranges 
Test Variable Range 
Bucket Drum Size Small, Medium, Large 
Linear Cut Speed 10mm/s, 30mm/s 
Cut Depth 10mm, 40% of scoop height 
 
The combination of these variables resulted in 12 unique tests and each test case was 
repeated 4 times resulting in a total of 48 tests. The two values for cut depth were 
chosen to provide absolute (10mm) and relative (40% of scoop height) comparisons 
between the drum sizes. The cut depths were based on prior experience with the 
RASSOR 2.0 excavation robot. During the many hundreds of hours of testing with 
RASSOR 2.0, it was observed that when digging at the full depth of the bucket drum 
scoop the regolith could bridge across the opening and reduce the amount of regolith 
collected per rotation. The team found that limiting the cut depth to only utilize a 
maximum of 50% of the bucket drum scoop opening would collect more regolith per 
rotation.  
 
 
   
 
The rotational speed of the bucket drums 
and the linear cut speeds were 
intentionally linked during testing to keep 
a constant cut pitch (the number of scoops 
per linear distance) across all bucket drum 
sizes. When the linear cut speed was 
increased or decreased the rotational 
speed was changed proportionally. The 
chosen ratio resulted in a bucket drum 
tangential velocity that was 8.5x the linear 
cut speed. This ratio was based upon 
previous experience and modeling and 
ensured a relatively smooth cut surface 
that would benefit subsequent cutting 
passes (see Figure 7). The linear cut 
speeds chosen are in the range needed for 
the IPEx concept of operations. 
 
TEST PROCEDURE 
Prepare/Reset Test Bed: 
The test bed was carefully prepared and characterized with hand geotechnical tools 
throughout the testing regimen to ensure consistency and repeatability. The BP-1 
lunar regolith simulant requires special considerations when preparing or resetting the 
test bed. The geotechnical properties of the soil bed can vary wildly based on factors 
such as humidity, pouring method, compacting method, and surrounding soil 
densities, just to name a few. 
To prepare the test bed or to reset it between test regimens, a team member first used 
a hand shovel to loosen the bed of simulant. This operation involved scooping up the 
BP-1 simulant to approximately 80cm of depth, and then gently pouring it back into 
the same location. This operation was performed on the entire width and length of the 
bucket drum test bed. 
The team member then scooped excess material from previous tests to roughly fill in 
noticeable low spots. After the simulant had been adequately churned up and roughly 
evened, a wide flat rake was manually pulled across the surface to perform a rough 
level. Care was taken to not compact the soil during this process. Once the surface 
was roughly leveled by hand, the Bucket Drum Test Stand was outfitted with a 
leveling bar and was used to perform final precision leveling and smoothing (see 
Figure 8).  
Figure 7.  Bucket Drum Test Bed 
being precision leveled 

 
   
 
Next, the Bucket Drum Test Stand was 
outfitted with a vibratory compactor and 
was used to perform precise and 
repeatable soil compaction. The 
compactor was gently lowered onto the 
surface and dragged across the full length 
of the test bed for 4 separate passes while 
being lowered 2mm between each pass 
(see Figure 9). 
 
The bucket drum under test was then 
spun up by the Bucket Drum Test Stand 
and gently lowered via manual control 
to find the exact Z-axis position where 
the bucket drum just barely touched the 
surface. This Z-axis position became the 
zero position for height and all 
subsequent Z-axis position commands 
were based off that number.  
Once the bucket drum test bed was 
leveled and compacted, hand-held 
geotechnical tools were used to characterize the soil (see Figure 10). A Humboldt 
Pocket Shear Vane Tester was used for quick and efficient determinations of shear 
strength. A Humboldt Soil Penetrometer was used to determine compressive strength 
of the unconfined soil. Three measurements with each tool were taken in three 
separate locations along the 
length of the bucket drum test 
bed. These measurements were 
taken before and after each 
bucket drum test run to confirm 
consistency from test to test.  
During the course of testing the 
average measurement from the 
shear vane tester ranged from 
27-32 kPa and the penetrometer 
from 206-226 kPa. 
After the bucket drum test bed 
was precisely leveled and 
compacted, a 5mm skim cut was 
Figure 8.  Bucket Drum Test Bed being 
precision leveled 
Figure 9. Bucket Drum Test Bed being 
precision compacted 
Figure 10. Team members taking geotechnical 
measurements of the Bucket Drum Test Bed 
following a test run 

 
   
 
performed with the bucket drum under test. This skim cut removed the less 
compacted topmost layer of simulant and ensured each test began with a regolith bed 
under the same conditions. All these steps were taken to prepare the bucket drum test 
bed for the actual bucket drum testing. 
Bucket Drum Testing: 
The Bucket Drum Test Stand control software was configured for each test run by test 
personnel. Configurable parameters include bucket drum rotational speed in rpm, X-
axis linear speed in mm per sec, Z-axis cut depth in mm, data log filename, load cell 
zeroing speed in rpm, X-axis start/end/dump positions in mm, and others.  
Once all the control software parameters were configured per the current line in the 
test matrix, the operator simply pressed the START TEST button and the Bucket 
Drum Test Stand control software automatically performed the entire test run. Each 
automated test run included the following actions: 
• start data logging 
• temporarily spin the bucket drum under test in mid-air and monitor the values 
of all the load cells 
• calculate each load cell value offset, zero the load cells, and stop drum 
rotation 
• while still in mid-air, move the bucket drum under 
test to the configured starting X-axis position 
• lower the drum via Z-axis to the configured cut 
depth inside the trench so it is still hanging in 
mid-air 
• spin the bucket drum under test to the configured 
rotational speed 
• translate the bucket drum under test along the X-
axis at the configured linear speed 
• once the bucket drum under test has reached the 
configured end X-axis position (or user hits the 
ABORT TEST button), raise the bucket drum in 
mid-air, allow the full drum to rotate a minimum 
of one rotation, halt the bucket drum spinning, 
move the bucket drum in X-axis to the dump 
location, and spin the bucket drum backwards to 
dump out the material (see Figure 11) 
• halt data logging 
Figure 11. Bucket drum 
dumping collected regolith 

 
   
 
After each test run, test personnel used the hand-held geotechnical tools to 
characterize the soil along the newly revealed surface layer. Then test personnel 
configured the control software parameters per the next line in the test matrix and 
another run was performed. As this sequence was repeated, the bucket drum under 
test dug a step deeper into the prepared regolith simulant during each test run. After 
several test runs, the Bucket Drum Test Stand reached a depth limit as the structure 
on the Z-axis approached the uncut top layer of regolith simulant. The test matrix was 
designed such that test runs were paused prior to this limit and the test bed was then 
reset per the earlier section before continuing.  
RESULTS 
Example test output data 
In order to properly design IPEx the forces and torques during excavation must be 
understood. Figure 12 below shows a typical plot of the forces and torques produced 
during a bucket drum excavation test.  The force in the X direction is the primary 
force of excavation. This force was generally constant during an excavation test 
because the regolith bed was prepared and leveled, and the cutting depth and speed 
were constant.   The force in the Y direction was negligible in all test data. The force 
Figure 12. Example bucket drum test output data 
Start cut 
Drum rotating in air 
Dump 
Stop cut 
 
   
 
in the Z direction starts from zero and linearly increases as the regolith is captured in 
the drum. The total torque about the R axis of the bucket drum is a combination of the 
torque due to the excavation X-force and the torque of the captured regolith 
recirculating inside the drum. Following a test cut the bucket drum was lifted into the 
air and rotated multiple revolutions. The torque shown during that process is purely 
due to the recirculation of the captured regolith as the drum is no longer in contact 
with the test bed. Similarly, the Z force at that time is constant and equates to the 
weight of the regolith captured in the drum. Finally, the forces and torques can be 
seen returning to zero quickly upon reversing the rotation of the drum and dumping 
the regolith.  
 
Excavation force sensitivity to cut depth and speed 
To aide with the design of bucket drums and their actuators a plot was generated that 
shows the horizontal excavation force per bucket drum width vs cut speed and depth 
(see Figure 13). This plot can be used to provide an estimated horizontal excavation 
force for various scales of bucket drums, cut depths, and cut speeds. The ranges of the 
Figure 13. Example bucket drum test output data 

 
   
 
variables in this work envelope the needs for the IPEx concept of operations, however 
future work could increase these ranges to increase fidelity. The shaded area in the 
plot shows the tested range of these variables and the resulting trend lines from the 
data.  
 
Total regolith collected 
The average mass of regolith collected by each bucket drum is an important metric to 
properly scale IPEx to meet the mission KPPs. Table 3 below lists the average mass 
of regolith collected for the three scales of bucket drums tested and corresponding 
total excavator capacity for a 4-bucket-drum system. 
 
Table 3: Total regolith collected 
Bucket Drum Size Avg. Total Regolith  
Collected Per Drum (kg) 
4- Bucket-Drum  
Excavator Capacity (kg) 
Small 3.80 15.21 
Medium 7.30 29.20 
Large 24.98 99.94 
 
Regolith collection rate 
Similarly, the regolith collection rate of each bucket drum is an important metric to 
properly scale IPEx to meet the mission KPPs. Figure 14 below shows a plot of the 
collection rate of a single drum against the drum size, cut speed, and cut depth.   
Figure 14. Example bucket drum test output data 

 
   
 
 
Excavation energy per mass of regolith collected 
The energy used to excavate the regolith is also a metric that will inform the IPEx 
design. Figure 15 below shows a plot of the mechanical energy (from torque and 
RPM at the bucket drum) per kilogram of collected regolith against the tested bucket 
drum sizes, cut speeds, and cut depths.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
The experimental data from the testing described above results in the following 
conclusions:   
• The horizontal excavation force per unit width of bucket drum increases with 
increasing linear cut speed and cut depth.  The plot of this data can be used to 
estimate the forces for various scale bucket drums, cut speeds, and cut depths.  
• The medium and small scale bucket drums tested are able to collect the 
necessary amount of regolith at the desired rate to support the IPEx concept of 
operations.  
• Excavation energy per mass of regolith collected is reduced as cut speed 
increases, drum size increases, and cut depth decreases.  
Figure 15. Example bucket drum test output data 

 
   
 
These data and the corresponding trends will be used to inform the design of the IPEx 
bucket drum subsystem and can form a baseline for future bucket drum designs. 
Additional tests should be conducted to increase the data available and the fidelity of 
the predicted trends.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
Clark, D., R. Patterson, and D. Wurts. "A novel approach to planetary regolith 
collection: the bucket drum soil excavator." AIAA Space 2009 Conference & 
Exposition. 2009. 
 
Dickson, D. C., Sibille, L., Galloway, G. M., Mueller, R. P., Smith, J. D., Mantovani, 
J. G., & Schreiner, S. (2016). Modeling Dynamics of Counter-Rotating Bucket Drum 
Excavation for In Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) in Low-Gravity Environments. 
Earth and Space 2016. 
 
Gallo, C.A., Wilkinson, R.A., Mueller, R.P., Schuler, J. M., & Nick, A.J. (2010). 
Comparison of ISRU Excavation System Model Blade Force Methodology and 
Experimental Results. NASA/TM- 2010-215591. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, 
OH. 
 
Mueller, R. P., Cox, R. E., Ebert, T., Smith, J. D., Schuler, J. M., & Nick, A. J. (2013, 
March). Regolith Advanced Surface Systems Operations Robot (RASSOR). In 
Aerospace Conference, 2013 IEEE (pp. 1-12). IEEE. 
 
Mueller, R. P., Smith, J. D., Schuler, J. M., Nick, A. J., Gelino, N. J., Leucht, K. W., 
Townsend, I. I., & Dokos, A. G. (2016). Design of an Excavation Robot: Regolith 
Advanced Surface Systems Operations Robot (RASSOR) 2.0. Earth and Space 2016.  
 
Suescun-Florez, E., Roslyakov, S., Iskander, M., and Baamer, M. (2014). 
Geotechnical Properties of BP-1 Lunar Regolith Simulant. American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA. 
 
Wilkinson, A. & DeGenarro, A. (2007). “Digging and pushing lunar regolith: 
Classical soil mechanics and the forces needed for excavation and traction.” Journal 
of Terramechanics 44, 133–152. 
 
Zelenin, A., Balovnev, V., & Kerov, I. (1975). Machines for Moving the Earth: 
Fundamentals of the Theory of Soil Loosening, Modeling of Work Processes and 
Forecasting Machine Parameters. Amerind Publishing Co. and Mashinostroenie, 
Moscow. 
 
Zeng, X., Burnoski, L., Agui, J., & Wilkinson, A. (2007). Calculation of Excavation 
Force for ISRU on Lunar Surface. 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and 
Exhibit, Reno, NV. 