 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
1 
An ISRU Propellant Production System to Fully Fuel a Mars 
Ascent Vehicle  
Julie E. Kleinhenz1  
NASA Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, OH, 44135 
Aaron Paz2 
NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, 77058 
In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) will enable the long term presence of humans beyond 
low earth orbit. Since 2009, oxygen production from the Mars atmosphere has been baselined 
as an enabling technology for Mars human exploration by NASA. However, using water from 
the Martian regolith in addition to the atmospheric CO2 would enable the production of both 
liquid Methane and liquid Oxygen, thus fully fueling a Mars return vehicle. A case study was 
performed to show how ISRU can support NASA’s Evolvable Mars Campaign (EMC) using 
methane and oxygen production from Mars resources.  A model was built and used to generate 
mass and power estimates of an end-to-end ISRU system including excavation and extraction 
water from Mars regolith, processing the Mars atmosphere, and liquefying the propellants. 
Even using the lowest yield regolith, a full ISRU system would weigh 1.7 mT while eliminating 
the need to transport 30 mT of ascent propellants from earth.    
Nomenclature 
COTS = Commercial Off The Shelf 
DRA = Design Reference Architecture 
ECLSS = Environmental Control and Life Support System 
EMC = Evolvable Mars Campaign 
ISRU =  In-Situ Resource Utilization 
LEO = Low Earth Orbit 
MAV = Mars Ascent Vehicle 
mT = metric Ton 
MWIP = Mars Water ISRU Planning 
 
I. Introduction 
N 2009 NASA published the Mars Design Reference Architecture 1 (DRA) 5.0 to define a baseline architecture for 
a manned Mars mission and the associated technologies needed to make it happen. Among these, In-Situ Resource 
Utilization (ISRU) was identified as an enabling technology . However DRA 5.0 only called out the production of 
oxygen from the atmospheric CO 2 for ascent propulsion and life support . Using water from Martian regolith, in 
combination with the atmospheric CO 2, would enable the production of both o xygen and methane to fully fuel an 
ascent vehicle, as well as supply both water and oxygen for life support purposes. This approach was not previously 
baselined due to the perceived complexities and mass penalties involved in mining the regolith and lack of confidence 
in water availability. Since the publication of DRA5.0, robotic and orbital exploration of Mars have indicated a greater 
likelihood, and more prevalent presence, of wat er in the Mars regolith 2. A study was therefore commissioned by the 
NASA Evolvable Mars Campaign (EMC) to estimate the quantitative benefit s and trades involved in an end -to-end 
Mars water ISRU system.  
                                                           
1 Research Aerospace Engineer , Chemical and Thermal Propulsion Systems , 21000 Brookpark Rd. Cleveland, OH 
44135, Senior Member. 
2 Mechanical Engineer, Propulsion and Power Division/Energy Conversion Systems, 2101 Nasa Pkwy/Mailcode EP3 
Houston, TX 77058, AIAA member 
I 
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
2 
 The goal of the this study was to develop models to estimate mass and power needs for an end-to-end human-scale 
ISRU production system.  Models were built for both the oxygen -only and the oxygen -methane systems for 
comparison. Specific component/subsystem technologies were chosen to anchor the models to obtain a ‘deep-dive’ of 
one specific system structure.  While these may not be the optimum technologies in the long -run, they were chosen 
based on their development status.  Components and subsystems with some  existing performance data were favored 
to feed the largely empirically-based models. The selected technologies are from in-house technology development, 
NASA solicited technologies, or  relevant off -the-shelf technologies. In some cases, detailed component models 
already existed (Solid Oxide Electrolysis, Sabatier reactor, etc)  and were incorporated directly into the model. The 
model was built in Microsoft Excel both to leverage previous work and for ease of use for team members.   
II. Assumptions 
The results discussed here will focus on the 2016 EMC architecture3 using the assumptions detailed here. However, 
flexibility was built into the model to allow for various mission scenarios.  A modular approach to the subsystem 
models was used so that different technologies can be traded in. 
A. Mission Scenario 
The o verall architecture of the 
EMC specifies that a pre- deployed 
Mars Ascent Vehicle (MAV) should 
be capable of transporting 4 crew 
members off the surface of Mars.  
Earlier studies 4 have specified the 
details of the MAV propulsion system 
which were used to generate the  
requirements for this ISRU study.  
The MAV engines use liquid oxygen 
and liquid methane (L O2/LCH4) and 
operate in mixture ratios between 3:1 
and 3.5:1 (oxygen: methane). The total propellant needed for ascent is 7.0  mT of methane and 22.7 mT of oxygen.  
The mission timeline for this study was based on the assumption that the ISRU system and MAV will be emplaced 
one mission opportunity ahead of human arrival, and that the MAV  must be fully fueled prior to human departure 
from earth. Mars launch windows are every 26 months. Assuming a 9 month transit and one month of margin, ISRU 
production must take place in 16 months (480 days).  Surface operations are assumed to be on a 24hr operating cycle 
with continuous operation for the 480 days.  
The schematic for the ISRU system 
used in this study is shown in Fig.  1. 
Atmospheric CO
2 and hydrogen 
electrolyzed from ground water are fed into 
a Sabatier reactor to produce oxygen and 
methane. The Sabatier produces oxygen to 
methane at a ratio of 4:1 . Since this  is 
greater tha n the engi ne mixture ratio, 
excess oxygen will be produced.  Therefore 
methane production is the driving 
requirement of the ISRU system.  Figure 2  
shows the production rates needed to meet 
the timeline and MAV propulsion 
requirements. 
It should be noted that the design of the 
MAV and the mission timeline are continuously evolving. The  MAV propulsion needs were based on archival values
4 
and the timeline was based on DRA 5.0.  However these are top level inputs to the model and can be easily changed. 
Inputs are also available include additional oxygen and water production for life support. Trade studies to this extent 
will be presented below.  
It is important to highlight the boundaries between the ISRU system and other surface systems. The power source 
is not included in the ISRU system since it is assumed to be a separate surface system that will also support the habitat. 
 
Figure 1. Schematic of a full oxygen & methane ISRU system. 
 
 
Figure 2 . Production requirements for a Regolith water ISRU 
system. The methane requirement for the MAV is the driving 
requirement. 
 
Total mass needed
Rate at 480days 
continuous 
operation
Requirement: CH4 6978 kg 0.61 kg/hr
Reactants needed to 
meet requirement: 
H2O 15701 kg 
(785,050 kg 2% soil)
1.36 kg/hr
(68.2 kg/hr soil@2%)
CO2 19190 kg 1.67 kg/hr
Results in: O2
27912 kg total
(22728 kg propellant, 
5184 kg leftover)
2.43 kg/hr
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
3 
The ISRU system will be operating when humans are in transit, so the habitat and ISRU systems will not be operating 
concurrently. This study assumes continuous operation of the ISRU system which would imply fission reactors, but 
solar panels are also in consideration within the EMC program.  The ISRU system is assumed to be co -located with 
the MAV, so for this study the propellants are liquefied in existing propellant tanks.  Therefore, the ISRU system does 
not include propellant storage tanks nor storage maintenance systems (eg. zero boil-off systems), but does include the 
additional cyrocooler systems needed to liquefy  methane and oxy gen.  Likewise , a heat rejection subsystem is not 
explicitly included in the ISRU system since the thermal management will be heavily tied to packaging. However the 
ISRU system model does calculate estimates for heat rejection requirements for each subsyst em.   
B. Subsystems  
The technologies, corresponding to the subsystems  in Fig. 1, selected for this study were those with the highest 
flight readiness that have the most available data in terms of performance, mass, power, and volume estimates. These 
technologies are the result of ongoing ISRU development efforts, both in-house and solicited, as well as relevant off-
the-shelf technologies. Figure 3 overviews the technology  selection.  The  subsystems in the model are modular, so 
that other technologies can be traded in once subsystem models are developed.  Likewise, each subsystem model has 
its own set of parameters  that can be altered to perform trades  within them or to update empirical parameters  as 
technologies and testing are advanced.  
For the excavation subsystem, the 
RASSOR rover5 was chosen. Currently 
in development at Kennedy Space 
Center, this is a small rover (~66 kg) 
that uses twin bucket drums to excavate 
~80 kg of regolith. The choice of the 
excavator subsystem drives two overall 
architecture decisions for this study. 
First, that the excavator will deliver 
regolith to, and from, a centralized 
ISRU processing plant.  (An alternative 
option is a mobile processing system 
where the regolith is processed at the 
excavation site and water is delivered to 
the ISRU system. As designed, the 
RASSOR is a simple excavator not a 
platform for payload. Therefore a 
different mobility platform wo uld be 
required for the mobile processing 
system option.)  The rover is assumed to 
travel 100m to retrieve fresh material, 
though this range is a top level input to 
the excavator subsystem  model. A 
single rover trip involves excavating fresh regolith and delivering it to the ISRU system, as well excavating the spent 
regolith and depositing it 10 m away from the excavation site. RASSOR is battery powered so the model accounts for 
the timeline balance between resource range, battery recharge time, and number of trips needed to meet production 
requirements. More excavators are added as needed to meet these requirements. Laboratory tests in regolith simulant 
provided parameters such excavation time, speed, and power consumption during both traverse and excavatio n. The 
second architecture decision driven by the selection of the RASSOR is that  the bucket wheel is a surface excavation 
technique, so the target for this study was water in the hydrated  minerals of the Mars regolith.  Ice deposits in the 
prospective landing region (latitudes + -40deg) are estimated to be > 3m subsurface
6. Using the RASSOR , ice could 
only be accessed  by a significant amount of trenching or removal of overburden materia l. A different excavation 
technique, such as drilling, could be considered to target subsurface ice. 
The regolith processor  subsystem model consists of three key components, a regolith dryer, vapor cleanup and 
cold trap. The regolith dryer is based on published experimental data of screw conveyor dryers designed to remove 
moisture from large quantities of granular materials 7. The vapor cleanup component is based on COTS hardware 
developed by P ermapure LLC that has proven to be effective at separating contaminants from water vapor. The 
coldtrap model is designed to c alculate the cold surface area required to condense a given amount of water by 
 
Figure 3. The component technologies selected for use in the ISRU 
system model.  
Subsystem Components Heritage
Excavation
Excavation RASSOR 2.0 excavator – Bucket drum 
rover
KSC prototype hardware, 
laboratory tests in regolith 
simulants
Regolith Processing
Regolith Processing Auger Conveyor Dryer – heated 
auger with gas loop for continuous 
regolith processing
JSC design concept –
numerical sizing model, 
conceptual CAD
Vapor cleanup – Membrane
separator
COTS
Water collection – Cold trap JSC design concept-
numerical sizing model
Propellant Production
CO2 Acquisition Cryofreezer COTS –flight heritage 
KSC cold head conceptual 
design numerical sizing
Sabatier Microchannel Sabatier Solicited: Battelle PNNL
Regenerative Gas dryer, desiccant JSC development hardware
CH4/H2 separator Solicited: Hamilton 
Sunstrand
Electrolysis PEM electrolysis stack, Cathode feed Giner Inc.
Deionizer COTS
Inlet pump, mircorpump COTS
Regenerative Gas dryer, desiccant JSC development hardware
Liquefaction Cryocooler COTS
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
4 
providing an assumed heat transfer coefficient and temperature at the cold surface. The surface area takes the form of 
semi-circular fins, and a spherical container surrounding the fins is used as the pressure vessel and water reservoir.  
The atmosphere processing model consists of a CO2 capture system, a Sabatier reactor, condenser coil, water 
separator tank and methane/hydrogen separator. The CO 2 capture model is based on empirical data collected at 
Kennedy Space Center by testing a near -relevant scale CO 2 freezer system. The Sabatier model is anchored to the 
work performed at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in the field of microchannel r eactors for ISRU 8. The 
condenser coil is based on standard thermodynamic equations  and not anchored to any specific hardware. The 
methane/hydrogen separator model is based on test data from a custom  stack developed by Hamilton Sundrand as a 
deliverable to NASA. 
The water electrolysis model consists of an electrodeionization (EDI) module , water electrolysis stack, H2 
separator tank, and pumps. The EDI mo del is based on the performance of relevant scale COTS hardware sold by 
Snowpure Water Technologies. The w ater electrolysis model is based on the performance of a cathode f eed stack 
developed by Giner. The pump models are based on COTS products sold by Micropump. All pressurized tank models 
utilize ASME section VIII calculations to determine the minimum wall t hickness, and assume a 1.5 burst factor per 
ANSI AIAA S-80. In cases where the calculated wall thickness is too thin to be practical, an assumed wall thickness 
of 0.051 cm (0.020 in) is used to determine the mass of the tanks.  
C. Mars Water Resource 
Given that a surface excavator was 
chosen for this study, the water resource 
was assumed to come from granular 
surface material, namely hydrated 
minerals. The Mars Water ISRU Planning 
(M-WIP) study
6, which occurred in 
concert wi th this EMC study, identified 
four reference cases  for Mars water 
resources.  These cases are listed in Fig. 4, 
where cases B,C,D  are all potential 
granular surface resources.  Note that the 
presence of cases B and C in a granular, 
unconsolidated form has yet to be proven.    
These three reference cases , and the 
anticipated mineral composition of each , 
are built into the model. Values for heat s 
and temperatures of dehydration  for each 
mineral phase are included so that changing the temperature used in the regolith dryer subsystem (top level input) will 
affect the yield and  required power input.  A parametric study was performed to determine the a target  processing 
temperature and yield for each reference case. The focus was primarily c ase D, which is a mixture of many different 
phases and therefore has a broader release profile.  
Figure 5 shows the total amount of regolith and 
thermal power required to produce the water 
requirement for the baseline ISRU system (case 2, as 
defined in section III ). For c ase D regolith, higher 
temperature results in higher yield (1.5  wt% water at 
500°C), but at a significant power cost.  The baseline 
temperature condition for c ase D was chosen as 
300°C which gives a 1.3 wt% water yield (targeting 
both the smectite and sulfate phases).  Case C offers 
a significant reduction in both power and regolith 
requirements, but c ase B is clearly the best resource 
of the three offering the highest yield for the lowest 
input power.   
The approach of this study was to baseline case D 
and then trade against the other reference cases.  The 
case D regolith is more well- known and is expected 
to be largely ubiquitous across the surface of Mars. 
 
Figure 4. References cases for potential Mars water resources as 
defined by the MWIP study6. 
Deposit Type
Essential Attribute A. Ice
B. Poly-hydrated 
Sulfate C. Clay
D. Typical 
Regolith (Gale)
Anticipated water content at temperature 8.6% @ 150°C 2.7% @ 300°C 1.3% @ 300°C
Depth to top of deposit (stripping ratio) 3 m 0 m 0 m 0 m
geometry, size bulk bulk bulk bulk
Mechanical character of overburdern sand NA NA NA
Concentration and state of water-bearing phase 
within the minable volume
–Phase 1 90% ice 40% gypsum1 40% smectite2 23.5% basaltic 
glass3
–Phase 2 -- 3.0% allophane4 3.0% allophane4 3.0% allophane4
–Phase 3 -- 3.0% akaganeite5 3.0% akaganeite5 3.0% akaganeite5
–Phase 4 -- 3.0% smectite2 3.0% bassanite6 3.0% bassanite6
–Phase 5 -- -- -- 3.0% smectite2
Geotechnical properties 
–large-scale properties (“minability”), e.g. 
competence, hardness competent--hard sand--easy sand--easy sand--easy
–fine-scale properties (“processability”) , e.g. 
competence, mineralogy  
no crushing 
needed
no crushing 
needed
no crushing 
needed
no crushing 
needed
The nature and scale of heterogeneity variation in 
impurities
±30% in 
concentration
±30% in 
concentration
±30% in 
concentration
Distance to power source 1 km 1 km 1 km 100 m
Distance to processing plant 1 km 1 km 1 km 100 m
Amenability of the terrain for transportation flat terrain flat terrain flat terrain flat terrain
Presence/absence of deleterious impurities dissolved salts none none perchlorate?
 
Figure 5. Water extraction requirements for the three 
reference cases for hydrated Mars regolith. The total 
regolith required and extraction power requirements 
are shown as a function of processing temperature. 

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
5 
So while it represents a worst -case in terms of  water yield, it can be obtained largely independent of landing site. 
Ultimately the t wo bounding cases used in this study  were: case D t ypical regolith (as represented in Gale Crater 2) 
which is low yield (1. 3 wt% water) but relatively ubiquitous across Mars; and c ase B Sulfate rich deposits (8  wt% 
water) which are higher yield but are landing site dependent. 
D. Margins 
Mass and power margins are also included in the model as top level inputs.  Two margins were levied on mass to 
account for yet undefined support structure and to account for growth (unknowns, errors, etc).  A growth margin was 
also levied upon power.  For this study, these numbers were set at 15% for structural mass, and 20% for growth. 
The model is al so setup such that  the total production rate requirement can be achieved with multiple, identical 
ISRU systems operating in parallel.  This modular approach allows for redundancy and an opportunity to fit into a 
variety of mission scenarios. For example, a smaller ISRU system module could be sent on a pathfinder or precursor 
mission and then tied into other modules  as production is scaled up.  For this study, it was assumed that the total 
production was met using 3 ISRU systems operating in parallel, each producing at 40% of the total requirement.  
Therefore, the current system model produces 120% of the propellant requirements stated in Fig. 2. 
E. Oxygen-Only ISRU 
A model for an ISRU oxygen production system was developed in parallel with the methane ISRU system model.  
ISRU models for oxygen systems have existed in various forms for some time. These existing models were increased 
in fidelity based on recent development work and lab testing, and were incorporated into the same Microsoft Excel 
format for comparison with the methane model. The top level mission requirements for this model remain the same 
as those described in section II -A.  Like the methane ISRU syste m a cyrofreezer was chosen as the CO
2 acquisition 
technology, the s ame liquefaction unit were chosen , and the same modular system approach (three identical ISRU 
systems operating in parallel).  A solid oxide electrolysis (SOE) unit was chosen for the CO 2 to Oxygen conversion 
technology.  
III. Results 
For the purposes of this study, five cases were chosen to show  the impact of using ISRU for the EMC manned 
Mars mission.  These cases, shown in Table 1, were selected based on the needs of the EMC architecture, where Fig.6 
shows the requirements associ ated with each.  Cases 1 -3 are the baselines for th is study while cases 4 and 5  reflect 
some initial trade studies. Other potential trades and uses for the model will be described in following sections.  
 
 
Case Title Description 
0 No ISRU Represented by the total propellant mass needed for ascent propulsion, 
this is meant to be a comparison of the landed mass needed for Mars 
Ascent. With no ISRU the total methane and oxygen for propulsion must 
be landed. 
1 Oxygen-Only ISRU, 
propulsion 
Oxygen for ascent propulsion is produced using atmospheric CO2. All 
methane is transported from earth. 
2 Methane ISRU, 
propulsion,  Case D 
regolith 
Methane and oxygen for ascent propulsion are both produced using both 
water from regolith and atmospheric CO2. The regolith is assumed to be 
Case D, “Typical” regolith a represented by Gale Crater with ~1.3% 
water content. 
3 Methane ISRU, w/life 
support, Case D regolith 
Same as Case 2 but with additional water and oxygen requirements for 
life support 
4 Methane ISRU, 
propulsion, Case B 
regolith 
Same as Case 2 except using Case B regolith with ~8% water content 
5 Methane ISRU, w/life 
support, Case B regolith 
Same as Case 3 using Case B regolith with ~8% water content 
Table 1. The case studies used in this ISRU system model study.  
 
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
6 
The main goal of the EMC study was to understand how a Mars ISRU system would impact overall mission mass 
and power requirements. Therefore Case 0 represents the total mass of ascent propellants that would need to be 
delivered from earth if no ISRU systems were used.  Note that this only considers the mass of the propellants needed 
for ascent and does not include the additional mass of propellants and system s that would be required to deliver that 
propellant mass to the Mars surface.  
Case 1 in an ISRU system that produces 
only oxygen for ascent propulsion. This is the 
current baseline for the EMC architecture 
since oxygen is the bulk of the propellant 
mass.  Oxygen can be obtained from the Mars 
atmosphere so its production  is independent 
of landing site.  Methane (7 mT) must still be 
delivered from Earth and stored on Mars until 
ascent is required.  The numbers in this case 
only reflect what is needed to produce and 
store the oxygen, and do not consider mass/power for transport and storage of terrestrial methane.  
Cases 2 and 3 are combined methane & oxygen ISRU systems.  For the baseline, the lowest yield regolith, case D, 
is used.  This ‘typical’ regolith is expected to be found across the Mars surface, so using this as the baseline makes it 
landing site independent.  It is also a ‘worst case’ scenario in terms of system requirements.  Case 2, provided as a 
direct comparison to cases 0 and 1, consider s only the production of ascent propellant.  Case 3 adds in oxygen and 
water requirements for life support. The oxygen numbers are based on [9] while the water numbers are based on [10] 
which defines a so-called ‘water rich’ Mars scenario where Mars water is used for everything from drinking to laundry. 
The most conservative case was used which assumes an open -loop ECLSS system. Note that additional storage and 
transfer systems for the life support consumables are not incl uded in these results.  Case 3 again uses the worst case 
regolith yield (case D ). This is a very conservative scenario since the intention of c ase 3 was in fact a water rich 
landing site (high yield regolith or ice water). 
Cases 4 and 5 are trade studies of  cases 2 and 3, respectively, using the highest yield surface regolith, c ase B.  
These trades show how an ISRU system would benefit from a specific resource targeted landing site.  
A. Notional Packaging  
A three-dimensional Computer Aided Design ( CAD) model was created for each major component of the 
conceptual ISRU system and sized for the case 2 requirements. The CAD models were based on existing laboratory 
protoype hardware as well as geometric predictions from the model sizing routines. The individual components were 
then arranged into notional packages using a CAD software: “PTC CREO Parametric 2.0”. The illustrations in this 
section are only meant to convey a volumetric representation of the system and should not be considered a design.  A 
proper design would require significantly more detail that what is represented here. 
 Figure 7 illustrates the key components needed to extract water from hydrated minerals , arranged in a notional 
package. In this concept, a mobile excavator would deliver regolith into a size sorter  located above a lander deck . 
Sorted material then falls  into a scre w conveyer regolith 
dryer located below the lander deck.  Volatiles released 
from the dryer flow  into a membrane that separates water 
 
Figure 6.  The total consumable requirements used to model  
the ISRU system.  Note that the life support wate r number is 
highly conservative and the baseline system (3 parallel 
modules) produces 120% of the required consumables. 
 
Figure 7. Conceptual hardware for the excavation and 
regolith processing subsystems. 
 
Figure 8 . Notional packaging of the propellant 
production subsystems.  

 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
7 
vapor from other gases. Water vapor that passes through the membrane is captured in a passive condenser. Any 
regolith that passes through the screw conveyor is  dumped directly onto the Martian surface where the mobile 
excavator can remove it. CAD models for the mobile excavator and size sorter are based on existing hardware. CAD 
models of the regolith dryer, vapor cleanup an d water capture are concepts developed specifically for this study and 
are based on the sizing calculations in the model given the assumptions defined in section II.   
 Figure 8 illustrates the key components needed to convert carbon dioxide and water into dry oxygen and methane, 
arranged in a notional package. CAD models of the CO 2 freezer system, gas dryers, electrodeionizer , and pumps are 
based on existing hardware. CAD models of the electrolysis stack, Sabatier reactor, condenser coil and separator tanks 
are based on the results of the model, given the assumptions defined in section II.   
 Figure 9  illustrates the total volu me that 
would be occupied by ISRU hardware needed to 
meet the EMC assumptions. Three water 
extraction modules and three propellant 
production modules are notionally packaged on 
a single lander for visual reference. The ramp is 
not included in the ISRU mass estimates 
presented in this document.  The lander CAD 
model is courtesy of the NASA Evolvable Mars 
Campaign study, and has an outer diameter of 
approximately 9 meters. The best placement of 
these modules would depend on many factors 
that yet to be determined . For example, the 
curiosity rover uses a power source that 
produces 110We and ~2KW  thermal
11. If a 
similar type of power source were available for 
ISRU, it would be beneficial for the water 
extraction modules to be placed near the power 
source to take advantage of excess thermal 
energy.  
B. Comparison of Baselines Cases 
Figure 10 shows the results from the 
baseline cases 1, 2, and 3.  The hardware 
masses (A) and power  consumption (B) 
are color-coded by subsystem. This was 
done to call out which subsystems are the 
mass and power drivers to highlight 
where technology trades and/or 
advanced development should be 
focused.  Note that Fig. 10B has separate 
categories for regolith processing; 
thermal, which is t he heat input needed 
to release the water from the regolith, and 
electrical, which includes operation of 
valves, conveyance equipment, etc. 
Thermal energy does not need to come 
from an electrical source, but could be 
recuperated from heat rejection systems . 
In particular, the waste heat from a 
fission reactor could be leveraged to heat 
the regolith.   
Case 1, the oxygen -only ISRU system, is the simplest system  0.9 mT and 34 kW .  The addition of regolith 
processing for the methane system  in case 2 increases hardware mass to 1.7 mT and power to 52 kW .  The majority 
of the power increase is attributed to the thermal energy needed  to extract the water from the regolith  at 17 kW.  If 
this heat was recuperated from other systems instead of being supplied electrically, the power requirements for case 1 
and case 2 would be very similar.  In case 3, the addition of life support oxygen and water increases the system mass 
 
Figure 9. Notional packaging for the full ISRU oxygen &  
methane ISRU system. Three identical systems operating in 
parallel were baselined for this study to meet production 
requirements. 
 
Figure 10. System model results for the three baseline cases. Mass 
(A) and power (B) estimates are shown broken down by subsystem.  
A B
Excavation
Atmosphere Processing
CH4 Dryer
CH4 Liquefaction O2 Liquefaction
O2 Dryer
Electrolysis
Regolith Processing Excavation
Atmosphere 
Processing
CH4 Liquefaction
O2 LiquefactionElectrolysis
Regolith Processing
Thermal
Regolith Processing
Electrical
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
8 
and power to 2.2 mT and 80 kW, respectively. Since excess oxygen is produced in the methane system, the additional 
life support oxygen does not impact the system. The added water requirement impacts only the excavation and regolith 
processing subsystem s (since that addition al water would not be sent to the electrolysis subsystem). Again, the 
majority of the power increase is from thermal energy for regolith heating which accounts for 44 kW. The increased 
mass in case 3 is a result of an increased number of excavators and a larger regolith processing subsystem, both of 
which are needed to accommodate the higher regolith processing rate.   
C. High Yield Regolith 
When considering methane ISRU, the 
availability of surface water is a critical 
system driver.  Therefore trading in a 
higher yield resource option was one of the 
first uses of the system model.  The case 
studies as defined in Table 1  use regolith 
case B at 150°C and case D at 300°C as the 
bounding resource trade cases.  Figure 11 
shows how these regolith types impact the 
ISRU system.  Only the excavation and 
regolith processing subsystems are 
affected by the regolith type.   For 
production of ascent propulsion only, the 
higher yield regolith in c ase 4 results in 
only a 7% mass reduction over case 2, but 
a 27% reduction in power.  The mass 
change here is primarily due to the size 
scaling of the regolith processing 
subsystem. The number of excavators used 
in case 2 was already at the minimum (one 
per module) so the decrease in regolith did not change excavator mass . In cases 3 and 5, which include life support 
consumables, the higher yield regolith results in a 25% mass reduction and a 45 % power reduction.  In this 
circumstance, the mass reduction is more significant since the number of excavators were reduced with the higher 
yield regolith.  
IV. Discussion 
To consider the benefits of ISRU, it is important to 
consider the total mass savings from a mission standpoint. 
Figure 12 shows the “total landed mass” which includes the 
mass of the ISRU hardware systems as well as the mass of 
any propellants supplied from earth for the baseline cases. 
These numbers are also reflected in Fig . 13.  Since the 
majority of the MAV propellant is o xygen, case 1 shows a 
75% mass reduction over c ase 0 .  However the hardware 
mass of the case 2 is less than one metric ton higher than the 
hardware mass for case 1.  Yet, that one additional ton saves 
7 mT of methane from earth.  Note that these earth -based 
propellant masses (including the case 0 ) do not account for 
the additional propellant or system mass which would be 
required to deliver that MAV propellant to Mars from LEO. 
Transporting ascent propellants from earth would also result 
in a heavier spacecraft in terms of other spacecraft systems 
such as Entry Descent and Landing (EDL), propellants for 
launch from Earth and transit to M ars, and maintenance 
(storage and conditioning) of the ascent propellants in both 
space and planetary environments.  The mass savings in LEO 
 
Figure 12.  Comparison of landed mass needed 
for the ISRU and non- ISRU cases. These only 
reflect ISRU hardware mass and the mass of 
ascent propellant that would need to be 
transported from earth. 
Case 2
ISRU CH4 & O2
Propulsion
Case 1
ISRU O2
Propulsion
Case 0
No ISRU
Case 3
ISRU Propulsion & 
life support
 
Figure 11. ISRU system Mass (A) and Power (B) results for 
baseline and high yield regolith cases.  
A B
Typical Regolith 
(1.3% water)
Typical Regolith 
(1.3% water)
Water-Rich Regolith
(8.6% water)
Water-Rich Regolith
(8.6% water)
Excavation
Atmosphere Processing
CH4 Dryer
CH4 Liquefaction O2 Liquefaction
O2 Dryer
Electrolysis
Regolith Processing Excavation
Atmosphere 
Processing
CH4 Liquefaction
O2 LiquefactionElectrolysis
Regolith Processing
Thermal
Regolith Processing
Electrical
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
9 
(Low Earth Orbit) is on the order of 10kg for every 1 kg of mars produced propellant  on the Mars surface.  So a full 
ISRU oxygen & methane production system could save on the order of 300 mT of mass in LEO.   
The evaluation metric, shown in last column of Fig. 13, is the ratio o f propellant produced to the total mass. So a 
full oxygen & methane ISRU system (case 2) yields over 17 kg of propellant per ever 1 kg of total ‘landed mass’ (29.7 
mT propellants / 1.7mT hardware) , while an oxygen-only ISRU system produces 3 kg of propellant per 1 kg of total 
mass (23mT oxygen / 8 mT hardware + methane) .  Therefore, harnessing even the lowest yield Mars regolith water 
resource for ISRU offers a 6x i mprovement over an 
oxygen-only ISRU system.   
Since the low yield case D regolith is believed to 
be ubiquitous across the surface of Mars, the ISRU 
benefits discussed thus far can be harnessed largely 
irrespective of landing site. A resource rich landing 
site, such as one with case B (Gypsum-rich) regolith, 
does not have a large impact on ISRU system mass, 
but does offer a significant improvement in power 
consumption.  Figure 11B shows that power for case 
4 is 30% less than c ase 2 and is comparable to the 
power needed for case 1, the current EMC baseline.   
The addition of ISRU production o f life support 
water and oxygen consumables (case 3) increases the 
baseline hardware mass to 2.2 mT.  This still trades 
well against both c ase 0 and c ase 1 in Fig. 12.  
However these metrics only compare the ISRU 
system mass against the consumables needed for 
ascent propulsion. The case 0 numbers do not reflect 
the additional landed mass of the  earth based life 
support consumables.  Therefore the case 3 would 
likely trade even better to the non -ISRU case.  
However, the life-support numbers used in case 3 ar e intended to reflect a highly water -rich scenario, so the water 
‘need’ reflected here is greater than what would be shipped from earth.  For example, water for laundry is included in 
case 3, but the earth based scenario would be to ship more clothing. 
A. Extended Model Use 
The study presented herein is only one example of an ISRU 
system.  While not optimized, the mass and power numbers 
are of good fidelity and give a picture of how ISRU trades 
from a mission level perspective.  The model generated for 
this study has broader use, and  can be used to perform trades 
of technologies and be adapted to other mission architectures.  
Top amongst these is to trade in an excavation subsystem that 
would target subsurface ice deposits.  This would involve 
developing a model for a subsurface excavator  system.  
Technology development for large scale excavators of this 
type is limited at this time, which is why the surface excavator 
was baselined for the initial study. An ice excavation system 
would also likely involve putting the water processing system 
on the mobility platform.  This is a change in the architecture 
of the ISRU system itself.  Figure 14 shows different ISRU 
system architectures originally considered in the study.  Given 
stability issues of the ice and localized nature of a subsurface 
excavator, it is likely that the mobile processing option would fit best.  Even from the standpoint of a surface regolith 
excavator, the options in Fig. 14 could be a subject of other trade studies, including trenching to access the sub-surface 
water ice. When considering the cases 3 and 5, which include resources to support life- support, a deployed regolith 
 
Figure 14 . ISRU architecture concepts for 
resource acquisition and delivery. 
Centralized 
processing
Mobile  
Regolith 
processing
Deployed 
Regolith 
processing
Centralized 
processing
Large Haul
Regolith
100-500m
Dirty Water
100-500m
Regolith
100m
Dirty 
Water
Regolith
100-5000m
 
Figure 13.  Mass impact of ISRU systems as compared 
to earth based ascent consumables. 
ISRU system
Landed Mass Comparison
(ISRU Hardware + Propellant from Earth)
The ISRU system leverages the power and radiator 
systems that are pre-positioned by the lander for 
human systems. So these are not explicitly part of the 
ISRU system.
ISRU
Hardware 
Mass, mT
Total Mass, mT
Production Ratio: 
Propellant produced 
per kg of total mass
Case 3
ISRU propellants,
& life support
2.2 2.2 13.5
Case 2
ISRU 
propellants,
baseline regolith
1.7 1.7 17.7
Case 1
ISRU O2
propellant
0.93
8.0
(1mt hardware + 7mt 
Methane)
2.9
Case 0
No ISRU 0
29.7
(23mt Oxygen + 7mt 
Methane)
na
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
10 
processing system may prove more beneficial.  In this way the extracted water could be delivered to an ECLSS system 
and also separately to an ISRU propellant plant.   
Another near term technology trade that could be considered is the CO2 acquisition system.  Technologies such as 
sorption pumps and mechanical compressors have been demonstrated in laboratory and empirical models could be 
generated to replace the existing cyrofreezer subsystem.  Many technologies in the ISRU system, such as the Sabatier 
reactor, water electrolyzer, gas dryer and CO 2 acquisition also have applications in a human  Environmental Control 
and Life Support System ( ECLSS) system.  Uniformity of these systems could be a consideration  when selecting 
component technologies.   
While not presented in this manuscript, the thermal management of the ISRU system was considered during model 
development.  All of the subsystems models estimate waste heat generation .  The management of this heat, both in 
terms of radiators and possible recuperation, has yet to be fully addressed and could provide a substantial power 
estimate reduction.  Likewise, thermal management considerations could impact the concept of operations of the ISRU 
system. Instead of operating continuously, as currently assumed, the ISRU plant could be cycled to take advantage of 
diurnal temperature variations.   
V. Conclusion 
A full end-to-end ISRU system model (encompassing excavation, resource processing and propellant production, 
cleanup, and liquefaction) was developed to study the mass and power impact  of incorporating ISRU into a manned 
Mars mission. The current NASA Evolvable Mars Campaign (EMC) was used as a reference case study, and a baseline 
ISRU system was chosen using existing ISRU development prototype hardware. This is only one example of an ISRU 
system; other ISRU subsystem s and component models can be traded to better optimize the system.  For the EMC 
case study, an ISRU system represents a significant reduction in landed mass.  For ascent propulsion alone, an ISRU 
system supplying just oxygen would weigh nearly 1 mT but would still require 7 mT of methane transported from 
earth.  Producing both methane and oxygen from ISRU, even using the lowest yield regolith, would only increase 
hardware mass to 1.7 mT.  Not only would this save the 30 mT of propellants, it would also reduce systems and 
propellant needed to transport those ascent propellants from earth, resulting in even larger mass savings.  For every 1 
kg of Mars produced propellant, the mass savings in LEO is on the order of 10kg.  So a full ISRU oxygen & methane 
production system could save on the order of 300 mT of mass in LEO , which could eliminate several heavy lift 
launchers with corresponding cost savings in the billions of dollars per human mission to Mars   
In terms of power requireme nts, ISRU systems for ascent propulsion are estimated to draw between 30 to 50 kW.  
The mass of the power source is not included in the ISRU system estimates since this would be a separate system that 
would support all surface operations and would be needed in any Mars mission once humans arrive. The habitat power 
needs are estimated to be around 40 kW
12, which is the range of the ISRU system predictions.  Since the majority of 
ISRU systems would be operating during habitat dormancy the same power sou rce could be concurrently leveraged.  
It is also important to point out that the ISRU power estimates include power required to heat the regolith.  This 
thermal energy does not need to come from an electrical power source.  Heat recuperation from fission reactors and/or 
the rest of the system could be used to reduce the total ISRU power requirements. For the baseline methane ISRU 
system (case 2) the power draw could be reduced from 52 kW to 35  kW, which is comparable to the oxygen -only 
ISRU system  that has already been baselined in the EMC architecture. 
If an ISRU system were also used to generate life support water and oxygen, the system mass would be about 2.2 
mT, which is still significantly less than the 8 mT  needed to support ascent propulsion using an oxygen- only ISRU 
system.  For a water -rich landing site (high yield regolith) the addition of life-support consumables have only a 
marginal impact on the mass and power as compared to an oxygen/methane system for ascent propulsion only.  
This study shows that ISRU has substantial benefits in terms of reduced mass needs for a human mission to Mars .  
A full scale  atmospheric ISRU system to produce oxygen for  ascent propulsion reduces landed propellant mass by 
over 70%. When water mining and utilization is included to produce both methane and oxygen propellants, this mass 
reduction approaches 95%. 
 
 
 
 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
 
 
11 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the NASA ISRU Human  Spaceflight Architecture Team (HAT)  lead by Robert P.  
Mueller and funded by NASA’s Advanced Exploration Systems (AES) Program.  The ISRU system model  in this 
study utilized subsystem and component models developed by Todd Peters, Tony Muscatello, Lara Oryshchyn, 
Kamwana Mwara, Brian Banker and Koorosh Araghi. 
References 
 
1Drake, B.G., “Human Exploration of mars Design Reference Architecture 5.0”, NASA-SP-2009-566  
2Leshin, L.A et. al., “Volatile, Isotope, and Organic Analysis of Martian Fines with the Mars Curiosity Rover”, Science 341, 
1238937-1, 2013 
3Goodliff K., Troutman, P., Craig, D., Caram, J., Herrmann, N., “Evolvable Mars Campaign 2016- A Campaign Perspective”, AIAA 
Space Forum 2016, AIAA2016-5456, Long Beach, CA, 2016 
4Polsgrove, T. Thomas, D., Sutherlin, S., Stephens, W., and Rucker, M., “Mars Ascent Vehicle Design for Human Exploration”,  
AIAA Space 2015, AIAA2015-4416, Pasadena, California, 2015 
5Mueller, R.P et al., “Regolith Advanced Surface Systems Operations Robot (RASSOR) 2.0”, ASCE Earth & Space 2015, Orlando 
Florida, 2015 
6Abbud-Madrid, A., D.W. Beaty, D. Boucher, B. Bussey, R. Davis, L. Gertsch, L.E. Hays, J. Kleinhenz, M.A. Meyer, M. Moats, 
R.P. Mueller, A. Paz, N. Suzuki, P. van Susante, C. Whetsel, E.A. Zbinden, 2016, Report of the Mars Water In-Situ Resource 
Utilization (ISRU) Planning (M -WIP) Study; 90 pages, posted April, 2016 at 
http://mepag.nasa.gov/reports/Mars_Water_ISRU_Study.pptx   
7Waje, S. S., B. N. Thorat, and A. S. Mujumdar. "An experimental study of the thermal performance of a screw conveyor 
dryer." Drying technology 24.3 (2006): 293-301. 
8Brooks, Kriston, et al. "Development of a microchannel in situ propellant production system." Space Technology and Applications 
International Forum- Staif 2006. Vol. 813. 2006. 
9Sanders, G. B., “In-Situ Resource Utilization on Mars – Update from DRA 5.0 Study,” AIAA 2010-799, January 2010. 
10Stephen J. Hoffman, Alida Andrews, B. Kent Joosten, Kevin Watts, “A Water -Rich Mars Surface Mission Scenario”, to be 
published IEEE-2422, IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MO, March 4-11, 2017. 
11Bhandari, Pradeep, et al. "Performance of the mechanically pumped fluid loop rover heat rejection system used for thermal control 
of the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover on the surface of Mars."  43rd International Conference on Environmental 
Systems. 2013  
12Rucker, M.A., et. al., “Solar Versus Fission Surface Power for Mars”, AIAA Space Forum 2016, AIAA2016-5452, Long Beach, 
CA, 2016 
 
